Well, for the Army program, I know there was going to be a big drive to commission 10,000 lieutenants a year, which was a big increase over what they had.
Now, this was back in the 70s, and we were doing very well here.
We were commissioning about
150 or more a year.
I think now it's much less than that.
But we were doing our fair share.
And as far as the other services, I'm not sure what they were doing.
I know in the Army they had a program where everyone wasn't needed on active duty, but you needed a lot of people in the reserve, National Guard and Reserve.
And there was a program that if you wanted to, you know, just go on active duty for six months and be in the reserve of National Guard, you could do that.
And our problem here was getting enough slots, reserve slots.
A lot of the schools had problems getting, they had, they, people didn't want reserve slots, they wanted active duty.
So I swapped out, I did a lot of swapping around, around the, this, the, what they call a third region.
And I would call up,
the fellow that was over me, and I said, listen, I need five or 10 of those reserve slots, and I think I got them on every occasion.
So it was a matter of just kind of orchestrating how many slots you had, and if you didn't have enough, go out and get them other places.
How difficult was it then, numerically, for a sophomore in the Corps to get a regular commission?
Well, you had to be a distinguished military graduate, distinguished military student, distinguished military graduate, and I can't remember what it took to get that, a certain grade point ratio.
Has that changed much?
Recommendation by the, you know, by the instructors and so forth.
I'm not sure that it had, it did change.
I know I was a distinguished military graduate.
That's how I got a regular Army commission.
But we still put, you know, we've,
They had the same badge, you know, that I had back in the 50s.
And as far as you recall, numerically, those who met the standards didn't have any trouble getting a commission?
No.
Okay.
And we began to have some women meet those standards and get commission and so forth.
Were there some notable women, in a positive manner, were there some notable women who were pace-setters during your five years?
Oh, yeah.
There were several.
You know, I've had a hard time thinking of their names.
I can see them, but I can't think of them.
One of them was, well, I really can't think of their names.
I know one of them was named Julie.
But she was an outstanding young cadet, and there was another woman in the same outfit, just truly outstanding people.
There weren't any company commanders yet?
Any outfit commanders?
Yeah, we had outfit commanders.
See, we had a W-1, which is the Army and Navy, and then we had Squadron 13.
It was a 13, Squadron 13, which is a Squadron 14, the females.
I mean, Air Force.
Did the guys have nicknames for those outfits that can be recorded?
Well, they call them the Waggies.
The Waggies, yeah.
They were all Waggies.
It didn't make any difference whether Air Force or Army.
But we had some, Sharon Mabry was one.
It was, you know, I think she went to jump school.
And we had them that would go to jump school and things like that and excel in summer camp.
What about black students?
I had very few blacks, but we had, I know one, Ray Jones, who was from over at Colwell, who became the regimental commander, I mean the brigade commander, the brigade commander, and he was just a super, you know, no, Bill Jones, I don't, his name was Bill Jones.
And he was just a super cadet.
And we had a few others, but he was probably the most outstanding.
As far as you were aware, were there any ethnic or racial problems in the court?
I never had any.
I know we had some, like a fellow that was over, one of the band company commanders was Hispanic.
They called him Taco.
And his outfit had T-shirts, Tacos Rangers or Tacos Bunch or something like that.
You know, they were real proud of the fact that he was their commander, super young man.
Were there any problems that somebody was Jewish?
Well, see, no one knew who were Jewish.
It's like I told you, I think, earlier that I had some friends and I didn't even know they were Jewish until I got to be a junior, probably a junior or something.
I just happened to see it in the...
in the Aggieland.
In your Commandant days, did we have many overseas students?
Not very many.
There were few.
I know that we had one student from Honduras who, we made a deal with Honduras for him to be commissioned, and we got special permission for him to take Advanced ROTC and go to summer camp, Oscar Aviles.
And he, incidentally, his uncle,
was the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of Honduras.
And he was later assassinated in Honduras.
But this fellow was commissioned in the, we commissioned him on the stage there.
And this general from Honduras came up and we commissioned him in the Honduras Army right there on the stage.
I think I remember that.
The, now we didn't have,
during your five years, we didn't have the President of the United States visit or the Vice President or anybody from Mexico or any other didn't go through any of that.
What kind of routine for gubernatorial inaugurations and that march by the RVs and so forth?
inaugurate, one of the inaugurations, and I can't even remember who it was that was being inaugurated, but we took the RVs over there.
Of course, they did the honor guard and all that, and we took the cab over.
They marched in the inauguration parade, and the Aggie band was over there, and they marched in the inauguration parade.
But I can't remember, I don't know who the governor was at that time.
It might have been John Connolly, I'm not sure.
No, no, it was either Mark White or Clements, I suspect.
I bet it was Clements.
Because Clements was elected while Jarvis was governor.
Yeah, I think it must have been Clements.
It was about 1980 or something like that.
Let's see.
You mentioned the Sabre incident.
What is that?
Well, at the home football games, well, at all football games,
for crowd control, and this is just kind of a tradition, because they don't control any crowds.
They're supposed to be there in case they're needed, but they stand along the sidelines, and they all wear sabers, and they wear campaign hats, and they're called the ODs, the officers of the day.
So we're playing SMU, and the SMU football team scores, and the SMU Yale leaders run out on the field and lay down, and with their bodies, they're farming
SMU you know they're jumping around rolling around farming that well one of the cadets gets carried away and runs out and tells them they're going to get off the field and they don't comply and he pulls his saber so he's threatening them with his saber and of course this the picture of this made national news well it was you know it was a terribly embarrassing incident for me and so I knew
that I was really gonna hear about this.
So I figured, well, I figured what my approach would be.
And that was that I'm gonna immediately remove sabers from all ODs for a while.
So I was invited to the President's home, Frank Vandiver, for an after game get together.
So I went in, I walked in the front door of the President's home, and he's standing there waiting for me.
that he is very unhappy.
It's obvious that he is very unhappy.
So he went over, I walked over to him and I said, I want to apologize for what happened down there.
I'm going to assure you it will never happen again.
And I'm taking the sabers away.
First thing I'm going to do is take the sabers away from the ODs.
And so that kind of calmed him down, and we talked about it and everything.
So my plan was that if I take the sabers away, I can give them back because I knew the sabers were going.
But if he took them away, I would have to go to him and ask that they come back.
So I kind of preempted him.
And so we went on that year and I had people write me letters that, you know, taking the sabers away from the commandant, I mean from the cadets, ODs was terrible and the SMU player should not have been on the field and this and that.
And you know, it went on for a good while.
So the following fall, I sent a memorandum over to
to President Vanderveer, and I said, you know, this is the procedure for this year, that we are, in fact, going to allow the ODs to have their sabers.
However, they will be briefed before each game by Colonel Johnson.
Primarily, they're under no circumstance to take their saber from the Scalbert.
And we went on with the different restrictions on them.
It made it sound real tight.
And I sent it over.
You know, I said, you know, this is what I plan to do unless you have some objection.
Well, I never heard back.
And so I put them back in.
And I know a reporter from the BAT came in because this is big news.
The OD is going to get their sabers back.
And the BAT sent a reporter over to see me.
And I had about 100%
record with the bat on being misquoted every time.
So this guy came over and he said, well, I said, well, you know, it was never permanent.
I said, that was a temporary thing.
I said, you know, I removed them and I was planning to give them back, but I was going to wait a while.
He said, well, why didn't you tell us that?
I said, I'll tell you why I didn't tell you that.
It's because you didn't ask me.
If you'd have asked me, I'd have told you.
I figured that was a pretty good lesson for me.
Better learn how to ask questions.
But anyway, we gave them back, and it's gone along now.
I haven't had any more trouble.
Any other incidents like that that you recall?
Well, there was what I call the great carnation caper, and that was each year the Corps buys carnations for Mother's Day, red or white.
And as it turns out, I get a call like the day before
before Mother's Day from the Horticulture Club, and they want to know where to deliver the flowers.
And I told them, well, that's handled by the Corps staff.
I'll get in touch with them and have them give you a call.
So I called over, and as it turns out, two people on the Corps staff have ordered carnations, like 2,000 carnations each.
So we've got, we're over about 2,000 carnations.
And so I told them, I said, look, you know, you guys are going to have to get your stuff together over there and you're going to have to operate as a staff.
Now you've got a problem.
You've got 4,000 carnations that you've got to pay for.
So when you figure out how you're going to pay for them, come tell me.
And then when you figure out how you're going to solve this problem, well, let me know.
And they got it solved.
They paid for it somehow.
I can't remember how they paid for it, but that was one.
one incident was you know no one was hurt but it was a good lesson for them and what i wanted to do in the corps was let them make mistakes and but let them learn from their mistakes you know don't crucify somebody because they did something they made a mistake doing something i you know i would hope they wouldn't do anything dumb but you know you get two thousand
young people 18 to 20 years old together, and there's going to be a few dumb things that happen.
One dumb thing was one of the upperclassmen around Christmas was approaching, and he told the freshman to go out.
They wanted some Christmas trees out in front of the dorm.
So the next morning, I hear these two big pine trees out there.
Well, then I get a call from a prof.
These pine trees came from in front of his place.
He had planned them so many years ago and this and he was very upset.
So I told him, well, we'll work something out.
So what we did, we got a valuation on the, we got a value on the pine trees, which is I think about $400.
And then the outfit had to come up with that much money and go out and
replant his entrance to his place out in the country and it had been four hundred dollars.
Had somebody cut them down?
The cadets had gone out and cut them down.
Yeah the freshman had gone out and cut them you know so they said go get Christmas tree and they went out and they got the two pine trees and then I got a call one night it was probably
one or two o'clock in the morning, some professor, and oh, he was very upset, and he was really almost screaming at me, and as it turned out, he had heard some hollering out in his, he lived out in the country here, he had heard someone hollering in the night, and he went out there, and it was a cadet with all the underwear on him, it was a freezing night, was tied to this tree, so he got the guy and brought him in and draped a coat or blanket over him, and he called me to come after him.
So the thing about it, he gave me directions and I drove around out in the country there for about an hour before I finally saw a place that had a light on and went down there and of course apologized to the guy and picked up this cadet who was, by that time, he was just about frozen and took him back to the dormitory.
So, you know, that was, those are the things you can look back on and laugh, but at the time, it wasn't too funny.
What about Bonfire from the Commandant's point of view during those five years?
Okay, I tried to limit the Corps participation in Bonfire.
In fact, after a year or two, I went to the student service staff and I said, the Corps is doing too much.
We've got to get the civilian students involved.
And the people in chartered civilian students need to get them better organized and get them to where they're building their fair share of the bonfire.
Because if you depend on the Corps next year, you're probably not going to have a bonfire because I'm going to fix it where they're not going to participate and you're not going to have a bonfire.
So that was the ultimatum I gave them.
And it worked out.
And they got, you know, they got red pots over in the civilian and they got brown pots and I don't know what kind of, what all pots they have, but they got organized and we got a lot more participation.
I went out one night about, oh, it was,
probably 11 o'clock at night and checking on there probably three or four hundred freshmen out there and they needed about 50.
They were all out there just kind of standing around and then I found out that the next day was the big chemistry quiz.
Well these people ought to be studying or sleeping rather than out here standing around watching someone build a bonfire.
So I put a restriction on it where you had to have a card and the card had to say
you had a grade point ratio of over 2 or 2.5 or something like that.
Otherwise, you're not going to work on the bonfire.
So I put in some restrictions like that.
You know, sometimes those restrictions work, sometimes they don't.
But anyway,
The point is that I did put restrictions on people's participation in the bonfire and got the Corps to get a little better organized and have different units out there.
Just don't say, everybody run out there.
You know, we got to push so everybody goes out there.
Don't go out there if you're not needed.
And the bonfire was always?
The bonfire at that time was on Duncan Field.
And see, the Corps was right there by Duncan Field, so it was easy for them to walk over.
And was it during your years that?
and others put a limit on the dimensions?
No, that was before.
It had already... Yeah, but I lobbied for five years,
get rid of that cake.
I thought it looked terrible.
To go back to the old teepee style and first of all, it doesn't take near as long to do.
Second place, it's easier to do.
And third place, it's a lot safer than that wedding cake.
I always thought it was a monstrosity.
A while ago, as we were talking about people, Ron Blatchley, what was his role in those years?
Well, he was, first of all, he was the assistant to Charlie Powell and they were student affairs, I believe, student affairs.
And he was the deputy director of student affairs.
And then when Charlie Powell was moved out of the director's job,
Then Blasley became the director of student affairs.
I got along with Blasley real good, but we did, you know, have a few confrontations and everything, but we remained friends.
But we went to the mat a few times.
Now, was he still in that role when you retired as coming up?
Yes.
Okay.
Because, see, they went to the Baptist Church in Bryan, and we thought that he and his wife had lost their mind when he gave up that good job and went to work for McDonald's.
My goodness.
Well, he just wanted to be a millionaire.
Let's see, and Carolyn Adair, she had student activities.
All right, but you didn't have any direct... Well, we were all on the same, on John's staff, and we went to staff meetings.
When were those staff meetings?
Every Wednesday morning.
About how many people, 10, 8, 10?
Probably 12.
What were coldest, did John coldest have any pet peeves?
What were the things that bothered him most?
You know, I don't know that I recall any pet peeves.
I can't think of any.
Did you ever see him lose his coup?
No, not actually.
I don't remember ever.
When Frank Vandiver became president, did anything change relative to the president's office at the Corps?
No, he was supportive.
See, I'm his first doctoral student.
Yeah.
No, he was supportive.
He wasn't around much.
If you wanted to see him, it was hard to see him because he wasn't here.
Now, during your five years, the enrollment on the campus, the total enrollment continued to grow.
The core enrollment tended to be comparatively constant.
Did anybody ever try to...
to put any pressure on you to make the core bigger or smaller?
Most pressure was what I put on myself to make the core larger.
We were getting
We were getting, I don't used to know what percent of the incoming males.
Incoming females, we got a very small percent, but we got something like 20% of the incoming males.
I can't remember what it was, but we could usually figure on that each year, and that was, but we'd lose a lot, too.
Now, normally in those five years, normally those that left the court
at the end of the first semester or first year or when?
Well, you had a big attrition the first few weeks.
That was where your big attrition was.
Then you had a few that would drop out at the end of the first semester, and usually those are ones that dropped out of school.
And then you had a few more that drop out at the end of the first year, and it was usually for academics.
But that early first few weeks, they just shifted from the Corps to civilian.
Yeah, you had them.
I had one guy that he hadn't been in the Corps three hours, and he came in and told me he wanted out.
And, you know, I had another guy, I remember,
We'd get their hair cut about Tuesday, and it was Monday night, and he said he was going to get out of the Corps, and I told him, you can't get out of the Corps until tomorrow afternoon.
See, I was going to get that guy a haircut.
I was determined because he really needed a haircut, so I figured, well, son, we'll get you a haircut anyway, and you at least have gotten that out of the Corps, so I made him stay until I got him a haircut.
Where did they get a haircut?
What we did, we lined up every barber in town, and we sent them over by unit,
Oh, to the barber shops?
To the Pacific barber shops, yeah.
Oh, okay.
So like this one at the South Gate would have four or five, and they would be scheduled, you know, timed in.
What was the, at that time, what was the core practice regarding women and hair and hairdo?
Well, you just had to have it off your shoulder.
Okay.
It wasn't very strict.
And so there wasn't any problem with, as long as they kept their hair pulled up, they could have long hair.
Were there any other appearance realities regarding women in the Corps that were troublesome?
No.
Tattoos, was that a problem with males?
I don't know that I ever saw a cadet with a tattoo.
I wonder today.
I don't know.
Let's see.
As you saw it, what was the purpose of the Corps?
Well, one thing, it was the keeper of tradition as far as the Corps is concerned.
Of course, the purpose was, you know, to be
somewhere where you could have the Army ROTC, I mean, all the ROTC cadets, you know, live and get a better field for military service and better training for military service by living, you know, under military discipline, 24 hours in a military environment.
So that's, but to me, the purpose of the Corps is to maintain the traditions, because they are the, you know, they refer to themselves as the keepers of tradition.
Were you surprised in comparing your Commandant years to your student years of what traditions had come and gone?
Were there many?
Well, the basic tradition, there are a lot of practices that come and go, but there are some basic traditions, you know, like Silver Taps.
And, you know, march-ins at the football game.
Those didn't change.
And, you know, the basic silver taps, muster, things like that.
Being friendly, speaking on campus.
Of course, we just about lost that, you know.
In fact, I shock a lot of people.
I walk around the campus, and especially if they're a cadet, I'll say howdy right in their face.
And it kind of startles them, you know.
But basically, and you know, whipping out and meeting people.
Firm hand grip, look at them in the eye, Aggie ring, there's a lot of good things.
You know, all these traditions, the true traditions all started with the Corps, and now the Corps kind of feels like that they're here to maintain those traditions, and I believe they are, and I'm a great supporter of the Corps.
And on all of your experiences, do you feel positive about
the quality of the product from the Texas A&M Corps of Cadets compared to other military programs in the nation?
Oh yeah, I think we turn out just as good of officers as anyone, and I've seen it over the years.
I've seen some good ones, and I've seen some bad ones, and I've seen some good military academy graduates in all services.
I've seen some that weren't so good.
Other than the academies,
What ROTC programs of an A&M in the nation do you hold in high regard?
Well, the Citadel, VMI.
I haven't known very many Norwich graduates, but North Georgia, I've seen some fine people out of North Georgia.
And, of course, what we're talking about, we're talking about people from the south, essentially.
So, North Georgia, I met a few from VMI.
I mean, not VMI, but Virginia Tech.
And, you know, I can only remember one that I remember.
And, you know, he was a good officer.
But I met some fine officers from VMI in the Citadel in North Georgia.
If we had access to the Pentagon's records, do you have any idea about whether they would give high marks to any of the other ROTC programs in the nation?
I wouldn't have any idea.
I don't know how they would quantify it to begin with.
In my Missouri years, I learned that ROTC was required.
at the University of Missouri till about 1950 or so, and then they went optional.
And it was no, no, it had no important role at all.
During your years as commandant, were they still having the important core dances?
Well, ring dance and boot dance.
No, they had the boot dance and the ring dance, but nothing like we had, like we used to have the infantry ball and the artillery ball and things like that with the big... Those had ceased.
Those had ceased.
Now, they had a military ball with nothing like what we had.
Where were they holding it while you were coming up?
Like the old, the Ramada Inn over here.
That was usually where they would have one.
But they didn't have the... Was the Commandant invited as a special guest?
Well, yes, he was invited.
Then they had the combat ball.
They would have that in Duncan Hall.
You know, everybody wearing combat boots and so forth.
Combat ball.
Things like that I usually didn't go to.
Now, in the social events,
Did the co-eds in the Corps, did they participate in the social events also?
Yes.
They went to the dances and there were no incidents?
No, not a social event that I know of.
Well, did, as far as you were aware, did many male Corps members date female Corps members?
There were some of that.
Of course, there were some of them that were very attractive and there were others that
weren't that attractive, so the ones that were, you know, attractive had dates.
How often did the Commandant in your five years hear from the Aggie Mothers Clubs about anything?
Well, I used to go around, you know, I made speeches at mother's clubs.
But did they write your call you very often about?
Not very much.
You know, I'd hear from some of them.
Some of them, you know, I'd met and we kind of got to be friends over time.
But I never really had any complaints from the mother's club.
Right, and back to your perception of being the Commandant on the Corps.
You were trying to make the Corps a little larger and stronger.
What were your guidelines, your basic philosophy about what you wanted the Corps to be?
Well, I wanted to be a place where a person could go in and learn how to follow and then learn how to lead.
And in order to learn how to lead, there had to be some flexibility on making mistakes, that you didn't crucify someone for making a mistake, but you didn't want them to make dumb mistakes.
You know, you wanted them to use a little common sense on anything they did.
I don't know, that's kind of a difficult question.
But I, you know, I wanted the Corps to look good, and I wanted them to have discipline, and especially when they were in public, I wanted them to represent the Corps honorably and make the university proud of the cadets.
Were there people that you might have sent a student to get special advice?
Were there some advisors, counselors?
Well, we had each company or flight or squadron, that is, each unit in the Corps had a military officer that was their advisor.
And we, you know, encouraged that.
Some did a good job.
Others didn't pay too much attention.
Now the Army, they were pretty conscientious because I was their raider.
See, I raided them and gave them their efficiency report.
So they were a little more conscientious than some of the other people over there that didn't take a whole lot of interest in their cadet units.